## UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) open access policy review

**Email sent (July 2021) to Editorial board members in the UK**

Dear XYZ,

I hope this finds you well. I am writing to update you on the UK
funding body UKRI’s current review of its policy on open access to
funded research. This process is now entering its final stages. I
therefore wanted to inform you about the developments so far and give
advanced notice that a new policy may be announced imminently, which
could have implications for your journal and its authors.

### Background

UKRI (UK Research and Innovation) is the lead public research funding
body in the UK, and the largest signatory member of cOAlition S, the
group of funders which launched the Plan S principles in 2018, with
the aim of making the research outputs that cOAlition S members fund
immediately and openly available. UKRI has been in a lengthy process
to review its current open access policy, culminating in the launch of
a consultation in early 2020 to propose a new policy. UKRI is due to
conclude its review shortly, meaning that the new UKRI open access
policy may be announced imminently.


UKRI’s original policy proposals broadly align with the Plan S
principles and included proposals that all research should be
immediately and openly accessible on publication. Elsevier fully
supports open access, as part of our commitment to researchers to
publish and access the research they need – regardless of which model
they prefer. Nearly all of Elsevier's 2,600 journals now enable open
access publishing, including 500 fully open access journals.


UKRI’s policy proposals would challenge these sustainable routes to
open access by enabling free substitutes of articles to be made
available without incentives to sustainably fund immediate (gold) open
access. Additionally, UKRI may potentially withdraw funding for
authors to publish gold open access in hybrid journals (journals that
enable authors to publish either under the subscription or open access
models) outside of transformative agreements (commercial agreements
between publishers and institutions that work to shift costs towards
publishing open access).

Given the above, we - along with other publishers and some learned
societies - are concerned that UKRI’s proposed policy could impact on
journal business models and harm progress on open access. Further, we
believe that UKRI’s proposals will curtail researchers’ options for
compliance and funding to publish open access, thereby leading to
researcher confusion and encroachment on their freedom to
publish. Please see [here](https://www.publishers.org.uk/publications/the-practical-implications-of-ukris-proposed-open-access-policy-for-the-uks-research-sector/) for a position paper put together by our
trade body The Publishers Association, which provides an overview of
the key issues.


### Next steps

We have been liaising with our trade bodies to engage with members of
UKRI and government to represent our views on the proposed UKRI
policy, and will continue to work with stakeholders, including
yourselves, in efforts to collaborate on UKRI’s policy proposals in
the coming days and weeks. Please feel free to write to UKRI yourself
to express your views.

We will keep you updated on any announcements from UKRI and brief you
on any steps Elsevier takes in response to the new policy once it is
formally announced.

Meanwhile, please do let your regular publishing contact know if you
have any queries or if you would like to discuss further.

Kind regards,

...
Managing Director, Elsevier Journals



